feat(curriculum): Add basic recursion lesson (#36200)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/02-javascript-algorithms-and-data-structures/basic-javascript/replace-loops-using-recursion.english.md

---
id: 5cfa3679138e7d9595b9d9d4
title: Replace Loops using Recursion
challengeType: 1
videoUrl: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-recursion-works-explained-with-flowcharts-and-a-video-de61f40cb7f9/'
---

## Description
<section id='description'>

> Recursion is the concept that a solution can be expressed in terms of itself. To help understand this, start by thinking about the following task: multiply the 0th to nth elements of an array. Using a <code>for</code> loop, you could do this:

Reviewer: There really is no such thing as the 0th element.  There is an element at index 0, but that is different.
```suggestion
Recursion is the concept that a solution can be expressed in terms of itself. To help understand this, start by thinking about the following task: multiply the first <code>n</code> elements in an array to create the product of the elements. Using a <code>for</code> loop, you could do this:
```

> Recursion is the concept that a solution can be expressed in terms of itself. To help understand this, start by thinking about the following task: multiply the first <code>n</code> elements in an array to create the product of the elements. Using a <code>for</code> loop, you could do this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recursion is the concept that a function can be expressed in terms of itself. To help understand this, start by thinking about the following task: multiply the first <code>n</code> elements in an array to create the product of the elements. Using a <code>for</code> loop, you could do this:
```
I feel like using 'function' instead of 'solution' will help making things clearer.

Author: Agreed, thanks!

```js
  function multiply(arr, n) {
    var product = arr[0];
    for (var i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
        product *= arr[i];
    }
    return product;
  }
```

However, notice that <code>multiply(arr, n) == multiply(arr, n - 1) * arr[n]</code>. That means you can rewrite <code>multiply</code> in terms of itself and never need to use a loop.

```js
  function multiply(arr, n) {
    if (n <= 0) {
      return arr[0];
    } else {
      return multiply(arr, n - 1) * arr[n];
    }
  }
```

The recursive version of <code>multiply</code> breaks down like this. In the simplest case, where <code>n = 0</code>, it returns the result, <code>arr[0]</code>. For larger values of <code>n</code>, it calls itself, but with <code>n - 1</code>. That function call is evaluated in the same way, calling <code>multiply</code> again until <code>n = 0</code>.  At this point, all the functions can return and the original <code>multiply</code> returns the answer.  

</section>

## Instructions
<section id='instructions'>

> Write a recursive function, <code>sum(arr, n)</code>, that sums the 0th to nth elements of an array, <code>arr</code>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write a recursive function, <code>sum(arr, n)</code>, that creates the sum of the first <code>n</code> elements of an array <code>arr</code>.
```
